CHAPTER ONE
The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer winds
stirred amidst the trees of the garden there came through the open door the heavy scent
of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink flowering thorn. From the corner
of the divan of Persian saddlebags on which he was lying, smoking, as usual, innumerable
cigarettes, Lord Henry Wooten could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured
blossoms of the laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden
of a beauty so flame-like as theirs. And now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in
the light flitted across the long two-source silk curtains that were stretched in front
of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those
pallid jade-faced painters who, in an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey
the sense of swiftness and motion. The sullen murmur of the bees, shouldering their way
through the long unmoaned grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the black
crocketed spires of the early June hollyocks, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive,
and the dim roar of London was like the burdened note of a distant organ. In the centre of
the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of
extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting
the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused
at the time some public excitement, and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.
As he looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a
smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there, but he suddenly
started up, and, closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids as though he sought
to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.
"'It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,' said Lord Harry languidly.
"'You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor. The Academy is too large and
too vulgar. The Grosvenor is the only place.'
"'I don't think I will send it anywhere,' he answered, tossing his head back in the odd
way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford.
"'No, I won't send it anywhere.'"
Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows, and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue
wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy opium-tainted cigarette.
"'Not send it anywhere? My dear fellow, why? Have you any reason? What odd chaps you painters
are! You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you have one you
seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you. For there is only one thing in the
world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. A portrait like
this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite
jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion.'
"'I know you will laugh at me,' he replied.
"'But I really can't exhibit it. I've put too much of myself into it.'"
Lord Henry stretched his long legs out on the divan and shook with laughter.
"'Yes, I knew you would laugh. But it is quite true all the same.'
"'Too much of yourself in it? Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you were so vain, and
I really can't see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and cold
black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made of ivory and rose leaves.
Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus in you. Well, of course you have an intellectual expression
and all that, but beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. Intellect
is in itself an exaggeration and destroys the harmony of any face. The moment one sits
down to think, one becomes all nose or all forehead or something horrid. Look at the
successful men in any of the learned professions. How perfectly hideous they are, except, of
course, in the church. But then, in the church, they don't think. A bishop keeps on saying
at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and consequently
he always looks absolutely delightful. Your mysterious friend, whose name you have never
told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. I feel quite sure about
that. He is a brainless, beautiful thing, who should always be here in winter when we
have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill
our intelligence. Don't flatter yourself, Buzzel. You are not in the least like him.
You don't understand me, Harry. Of course I am not like him. I know that perfectly well.
Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him. You shrug your shoulders. I'm telling you
the truth. There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction. The sort of
fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings. It is better
not to be different from one's fellows. The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in
this world. They can sit quietly and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory,
they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. They live as we all should live, undisturbed
and indifferent and without disquiet. They never bring ruin upon themselves, nor ever
receive it from alien hands. Your rank and wealth, Harry, my brains, such as they are,
my fame, whatever it may be worth, Dorian Gray's good looks, we will all suffer for
what the gods have given us, suffer terribly. Dorian Gray is a great man, a great man,
a great man. Is that his name? said Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil-Hallwood.
Yes, that is his name. I didn't intend to tell it to you. But why not? Oh, I can't
explain. When I like people immensely I never tell their names to anyone. It seems like
surrendering a part of them. You know how I love secrecy. It is the only thing that
can make modern life wonderful or mysterious to us. The commonest thing is delightful if
one only hides it. When I leave town I never tell any people where I am going. If I did
I would lose all my pleasure. It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to
bring a great deal of romance into one's life. I suppose you think me awfully foolish about
it.
Not at all, answered Lord Henry, laying his hand upon his shoulder. Not at all, my dear
Basil. You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes
a life of deception necessary for both parties. I never know where my wife is, and my wife
never knows what I am doing. When we meet—we do meet occasionally when we dine together
or go down to the dukes—we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious
faces. My wife is very good at it—much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets confused
over her dates, and I always do, but when she does find me out she makes no row at all.
I sometimes wish she would, but she merely laughs at me.
I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry, said Basil Hallward, shaking
his hand off and strolling towards the door that led into the garden. I believe you are
really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You
are an extraordinary fellow. You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is simply a pose.
Being natural is simply a pose.
In the most irritating pose I know, cried Lord Henry, laughing, and the two men went
out into the garden together, and for a time they did not speak.
After a long pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.
I'm afraid I must be going, Basil, he murmured, and before I go I insist on your answering
a question I put to you some time ago.
What is that? asked Basil Hallward, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.
You know quite well. I do not, Harry.
Well, I will tell you what it is. Please don't. I must. I want you to explain to me why you
won't exhibit Dorian Gray's picture. I want the real reason.
I told you the real reason. No, you did not. You said it was because there was too much
of yourself in it.
Now that is childish.
Harry, said Basil Hallward, looking at him straight in the face, every portrait that
is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter. The sitter is merely
the accident, the occasion. It is not he who is revealed by the painter. It is rather
the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself that the reason I will not
exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown with it the secret of my own
soul.
Lord Harry laughed.
And what is that? he asked.
I will tell you, said Hallward. An expression of perplexity came over his face.
I am all expectation, Basil, murmured his companion, looking at him.
Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry, answered the young painter, and I am afraid
you will hardly understand it. Perhaps you will hardly believe it.
Lord Henry smiled and, leaning down, plucked a pink petal daisy from the grass and examined
it.
I am quite sure I shall understand it, he replied, gazing intently at the little golden
white feathered disc, and I can believe anything, provided that it is incredible.
The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac blooms, with their clustering
stars, moved to and fro in the languid air. A grasshopper began to chirp in the grass,
and a long thin dragonfly floated by on its own brown gauze wings.
Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward's heart beating, and wondered what
was coming.
Well, this is incredible, repeated Hallward rather bitterly.
Incredible to me at times. I don't know what it means. The story is simply this. Two months
ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon's. You know we poor painters have to show ourselves
in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. With an
evening coat and a white tie, as you once told me anybody, even a stockbroker can gain
a reputation for being civilized.
Well, after I'd been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers
and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that someone was looking at me.
I turned half way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time. When our eyes met I felt
that I was growing pale. A curious instinct of terror came over me. I knew that I had
come face to face with someone whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I
allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself.
I did not want any external influence in my life. You know yourself, Harry, how independent
I am by nature. My father destined me for the army. I insisted on going to Oxford. Then
he made me enter my name at the Middle Temple. Before I'd eaten half a dozen dinners I gave
up the bar and announced my intention of becoming a painter. I've always been my own master.
Had at least always been so till I met Dorian Gray. And then—but I don't know how to explain
it to you—something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in
my life. I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite
sorrows. I knew that if I had spoke to Dorian I would become absolutely devoted to him.
And that I ought not to speak to him, I grew afraid, and turned to quit the room. It was
not conscience that made me do so. It was cowardice. I take no credit to myself for
trying to escape.
Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience is the trade name
of the firm, that is all. I don't believe that, Harry. However, whatever my motive—and
it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud, I certainly struggled to the door—there,
of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon.
"'You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. Hallward,' she screamed out. You know
her shrill, horrid voice.
"'Yes, she is a peacock in everything but beauty,' said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy
to bits with his long, nervous fingers. I could not get rid of her. She brought me up
to her royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic
tiaras and hooked noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had only met her once
before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. I believe some picture of mine had made
a great success at the time, at least had been chatted about in the penny newspapers,
which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself face
to face with a young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me. We were quite
close, almost touching. Our eyes met again. It was mad of me, but I asked Lady Brandon
to introduce me to him. Perhaps it was not so mad, after all. It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without any introduction, I'm sure of that. Dorian
told me so afterwards. He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other."
"'And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man? I know she goes in for giving rapid
precess of all her guests. I remember her bringing me to a most truculent and red-faced
gentleman, covered all over with orders and ribbons and hissing into my ear and a tragic
whisper which must have been perfectly audible to every one in the room, something like,
"'Sir Humpty Dumpty, you know, Afghan frontier, Russian intrigues, very successful man, wife
killed by an elephant, quite inconsolable, wants to marry a beautiful American widow,
who everybody does nowadays, hates Mr. Gladstone, but very much interested in beetles. Ask him
what he thinks of Shouvalov." I simply fled. I like to find out people for
myself, but Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.
She either explains them entirely away or tells everyone everything about them except
what one wants to know. But what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?
"'Oh,' she murmured, "'charming boy, poor dear mother and I, quite inseparable, engaged
to be married to the same man—I mean married on the same day. How very silly of me! I forget
what he does. Afraid he doesn't do anything. Yes, yes, plays the piano. Or is it the violin,
dear Mr. Gray? We could neither of us help laughing, and we became friends at once.'
"'Laughter is not a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is the best ending for one,' said Lord
Henry, plucking another daisy. Hallward buried his face in his hands.
"'You don't understand what friendship is, Harry,' he murmured, "'or what enmity is,
for that matter. You like everyone.' That is to say you are indifferent to everyone.'
"'How horribly unjust of you!' cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking at
the little clouds that were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky like
raveled skeins of glossy white silk. "'Yes, horribly unjust of you. I make a great
difference between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for
their characters, and my enemies for their brains. A man can't be too careful in the
choice of his enemies. I have not got one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectual
power, and consequently they all appreciate me. Is that very vain of me? I think it is
very. But according to your category I must merely be an acquaintance.'
"'My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance.'
"'And much less a friend, a sort of brother, I suppose. Oh, brothers! I don't care for
brothers. My elder brother won't die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything
else. Harry, my dear fellow, I am not quite serious, but I can't help detesting my relations.
I suppose it comes from the fact that we can't stand other people having the same faults
as ourselves. I quite sympathise with the rage of the English democracy against what
they call the vices of the upper classes. They feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and
immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of
himself he is poaching on their preserves. When poor Southwark got into the divorce court
their indignation was quite magnificent. Yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the lower
orders live correctly.'
"'I don't agree with a single word that you have said. And what is more, Harry, I don't
believe you do either.' Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe
of his patent-leather boot with a tasseled malaca cane.
"'How English you are, Basil!'
If one puts forward an idea to a real Englishman—always a rash thing to do—he never dreams of considering
whether the idea is right or wrong. The only thing he considers of any importance is whether
he believes it oneself. Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with
the sincerity of the man who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilities are that the more
insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will
not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices. However, I don't propose
to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. I like persons better than principals.
Tell me more about Dorian Gray. How often do you see him?'
"'Every day.'
"'I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day. Of course sometimes it's only for
a few minutes, but a few minutes with somebody one worships means a great deal.'
"'You don't really worship him?'
"'I do.'
"'How extraordinary! I thought you would never care for anything but your painting—your
art, I should say. Art sounds better, doesn't it? He is all my art to me now. I think sometimes
Harry that there are only two areas of importance in the history of the world. The first is
the appearance of a new medium of art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality
for art also. What the invention of oil painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous
was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me. It
is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, model from him. Of course I've done
all that. He has stood as Paris in dainty armour, as Adonis with Huntsman cloak and
polished boar spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms he has sat on the prow of Adrian's barge
looking into the green turbid Nile. He has leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland
and seen in the water's silent silver the wonder of his own beauty. But he is much more
important to me than that. I won't tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done
of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. There is nothing that art
cannot express. And I know that the work I have done since I met Dorian Gray is good
work. It is the best work of my life. But in some curious way, I wonder, will you understand
me? His personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new
mode of style. I see things differently. I think of them differently. I can now recreate
life in a way that was hidden from me before. A dream of form in days of thought. Who is
it to me? The merely visible presence of this lad, for he seems to me little more
than a lad, though he is really over twenty, his merely visible presence. I wonder, can
you realize all that that means? Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school,
a school that is to have in itself all the passion of the Romantic spirit, all the perfection
of the spirit that is Greek, the harmony of soul and body. How much that is! We in our
madness have separated the two and have invented a realism that is bestial, an ideality that
is void. Harry, if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me, you remember that landscape
of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price, but which I would not part with.
It is one of the best things I've ever done, and why is it so? Because while I was painting
it Dorian Gray sat beside me.
Bessel, that is quite wonderful.
I must see Dorian Gray.
Collward got up from his seat and walked up and down the garden. After some time he came
back.
You don't understand, Harry, he said. Dorian Gray is merely to me a motive in art. He is
never more present in my work than when no image of him is there. He is simply a suggestion,
as I have said, of a new manner. I see him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness
and subtleties of certain colours, that is all.
Then why won't you exhibit his portrait? Because I have put into it all the extraordinary romance
of which, of course, I have never dared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He
will never know anything about it, but the world might guess it. And I will not bear
my soul to their shallow prying eyes. My heart shall never be put under their microscope.
There is too much of myself in that thing, Harry, too much of myself.
Poets are not so scrupulous as you are. They know how useful passion is for publication.
Nowadays, broken heart will run to many editions. I hate them for it. An artist should create
beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. We live in an age
where men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography. We have lost the
abstract sense of beauty. If I live, I will show the world what it is, and for that reason
the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.
I think you are wrong, Basil, and I won't argue with you. It is only the intellectually
lost who ever argue. Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you? Hallward considered for
a few moments.
He likes me, he answered after a pause. I know he likes me. Of course I flatter him
dreadfully. I find a pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having
said. I give myself away. As a rule he is charming to me, and we walk home together
from the club arm in arm, or sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and then,
however, he is horribly thoughtless. It seems to take a real delight in giving me pain.
Then I feel, Harry, that I've given away my whole soul to someone who treats it as if
it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament
for a summer's day.
Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger. Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.
It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.
That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves in the
wild struggle for existence. We want to have something that endures. And so we fill our
minds with rubbish and facts and the silly hope of keeping our place.
The thoroughly well-informed man, that is the modern ideal. And the mind of the thoroughly
well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It's like a bric-a-brac shop, all monsters and
everything priced above its proper value. I think you will tire first, all the same.
Some day you will look a-gray, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing,
or you won't like his tone of colour or something. You will bitterly reproach him in your own
heart, seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. Next time he calls, you
will be perfectly cold and indifferent. It will be a great pity, for it will alter you.
The worst of having a romance is that it leaves one so unromantic.
Harry, don't talk like that. As long as I live the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate
me.
You can't feel what I feel. You change too often. Oh, my dear Basil, that is exactly
why I can feel it. Those who are faithful know only the pleasures of love. It is the
faithless who know love's tragedies.
And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case, and began to smoke a cigarette
with a self-conscious and self-satisfied air, as if he had summed up life in a phrase.
There was a rustle of chirping sparrows in the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased
themselves across the grass-like swallows. How pleasant it was in the garden, and how
delightful other people's emotions were. Much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed
to be fascinating things in life.
One's own soul and the passions of one's friends, those were the fascinating things in life.
He thought with pleasure of the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with
Basil Hallward. Had he gone to it, he would have been in a state of ecstasy, and he would
have been sure to meet Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been
about the housing of the poor, and the necessity of model lodging houses. It was charming to
have escaped all that. As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him. He turned
to Hallward and said, My dear fellow, I've just remembered.
Remembered what, Harry?
Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.
Where was it? asked Hallward with a slight frown.
Oh, don't look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt's, Lady Agatha's. She told me she
had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that
his name was Dorian Gray. I'm bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking.
Women have no appreciation of good looks, at least good women have not. She said that
he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. I had once pictured myself a creature with
spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled and tramping about on huge feet. I wish I
had known it was your friend.
I'm very glad you didn't, Harry. Why?
I don't want you to meet him.
Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir, said the butler, coming into the garden.
You must introduce me now, cried Lord Henry, laughing.
Basil Hallward turned to the servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker. I'll be in in a few moments.
The man bowed and went up the walk.
Then he looked at Lord Henry.
Dorian Gray is my dearest friend, he said. He has a simple and beautiful nature. Your
aunt was quite right in what she said of him. Don't spoil him for me. Don't try to influence
him. Your influence would be bad. The world is wide and has many marvellous people, and
it don't take away from me the one person that makes life absolutely lovely to me, and
that gives to my art whatever wonder or charm it possesses. Mind, Harry, I trust you.
He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out if I'm almost against his will.
What nonsense you talk, said Lord Henry, smiling, and, taking Hallward by the arm, he almost
led him into the house.
End of chapter one
Of the picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde